Title: (PIG-2597) Move Grunt from JavaCC to ANTLR
--

Abstract
--
Apache Pig a platform for analyzing large scale data sets using high-level
data flow language.
Currently Pig utilizes two frameworks for generating language processors.
Grunt, an interactive command-line interface for Pig, is implemented
using JavaCC. But query scripts are parsed by ANTLR-based QueryParser.
This status is problematic due to the following reasons.
First, using two different parser generators in one project is
confusing to developers, especially to new ones.
Second, even for experienced contributors, understanding both frameworks
and maintaining dependencies in build processes are burdensome. 
Third, the different implementations of GruntParser and QueryParser hamper
adding new features. For example, it was not possible to use Grunt commands
such as `register` in Pig Macro because QueryParser does not understand Grunt
commands. (The issue was solved by a workaround patch.)

In this Google Summer of Code project, I will solve the above problem by
reimplementing GruntParser and merging GruntParser implementation with
QueryParser.  Removing GruntParser's dependency on JavaCC will help Apache Pig
project keep clean, easy to maintain codebase and continue to be improved by
many contributors. 

Benefits to Community
--
 * Implementing GruntParser using ANTLR removes legacy dependency on JavaCC and
 offers a better opportunity to fix bugs and add new features.
   * By merging two parsers into a single implementation, Pig will have
   a consolidated, easy to understand codebase, which is essential for 
   successful open-source projects.

   * Specifically, Pig Macro can be a fully functional piece of Pig script
   after `GruntParser` is integrated into `QueryParser`.

Project Goals (Deliverables)
--
During the Google Summer of Code program, I will finish

 * Design and implementation of ANTLR-based Grunt shell and related codebase
 such as ParameterSubstitutionPreprocessor,
 * Design and implementation of a test class for Grunt, and
 * Documentation of the code so that new developers can easily understand and
   change Grunt later.

The final deliverables will be in the form of patches to the trunk of Apache
Pig code repository.

Design and Approach
--
Current Grunt processes inputs via `class GruntParser`. Roughly, there are two
flows:
 
 * Command processing: `processCMD(String cmd, ...)` processes CMD, any command
   supported by Grunt shell, such as `cat`, `explain`, and etc.
   These methods are called from `class PigScriptParser`, a JavaCC generated
   parser and GruntParser's superclass, as soon as being recognized.
 * Query processing: If a given string is not a command,
   `processPig(String cmd)`
   registers the query via `PigServer`, and eventually queries will be
   processed by ANTLR-generated query processors
   (`QueryLexer`, `QueryParser`, `AstValidator`, `LogicalPlanGenerator`, ...).

First of all, this approach is not easy to understand without a proper
background. Even after a developer understood, changing and/or adding features
to those parts is difficult. For example, a macro definition is processed by
ANTLR-generated parser, but the macro could include a Grunt command
which should be handled by GruntParser. This specific problem was solved by a
workaround that supplements QueryParser with codes which handle Grunt commands.
But a better approach would be having a consolidated parser for both 
Grunt shell commands and Pig script.

The new Grunt implementation will be integrated into `class QueryParser`.
Each Grunt command definition will be added to query grammar definition files.
But each method defined in `class GruntParser` that currently processes the
command can remain as much as possible.
For example, the following grammar definition, even though it is not accurate,
can define `rm` command in Grunt:
```
remove
    :    'rm' path=ID
         {parser.processRemove($path.text, null);}
    ;
```

This way, minimal code changes and additions are required for the new 
implementation.

Also, replacing preprocessor (ParameterSubstitutionPreprocessor) with
ANTLR based implementation needs to be done.
`class ParameterSubstitutionPreprocessor` uses `PigFileParser`,
which is also generated by JavaCC, to substitute paramters into a query
script.

Timeline
--
 * First month (May 19 ~ June 18): Implement a test class for at least a few
   Grunt commands and add the command to QueryParser. This will make sure the
   development is on track with a right direction. 
 * Second month (June 19 ~ July 18): Fix the problems (if any) from the first
   month. Continue adding commands to the implementation. 
 * Final month (July 19 ~ August 18): Ask the community for review and test
   code and documentation.

About Me
--
I am a fourth year PhD student in computer science at University at Buffalo, 
the State Univeristy of New York. My main research interest lies in distributed
data processing systems. Currently I am developing a wide-area data processing
system that uses Pig Latin script language for describing data flows. 

Thanks to my research experience, I have a good understanding of how Pig
processes Grunt shell commands and Pig Latin scripts, generates logical plans,
and how the plans are translated into MapReduce jobs.  In addition, I am
knowledgeable in developing Hadoop MapReduce applications and installing Hadoop
MapReduce/HBase cluster. 

Since early 2013, I have been following Pig development list. 
I reported bugs and submitted patches [1][2] and particpated in discussions [3]
even though they were minor issues.

Before my graduate studies, I had been a software developer for more than 4
years. I am familiar with version control systems such as git and subversion. 

[1] https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/PIG-3166

[2] https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/PIG-3816

[3] https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/PIG-3809

Contact Info
--
 * e-mail: kyungho.jeon@gmail.com
 * www: http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/~kyunghoj

